---
draft: true
title: "I deleted all my email filters.  You won't believe what happened next."
date: 2017-04-11
---

I deleted all my email filters.  you won't believe what happened next.

Or "Skip the Inbox" considered harmful.

I get a lot of email.  So being clever I set up a number of filters in gmail to help manage the flow.  Many of them moved data out of the inbox to a special folder ("skip the inbox" or tag-and-archive).   I had a number of categories to help organize the onslaught and to prioritize email-from-humans.

Unfortunately, this didn't actually save me any work or time at all.  The filters not only deferred the work, they actually made extra work.

Since some types of emails were never visible in the Inbox, they'd pile up in the "bulk" or "reports" folder, unread.   Occasion I'd take a look and then spend 5 mins tring to delete hundreds of unread emails.   A true waste of time - spending time to delete things I'm not using.

 these folders also screwed up search results.  Given  the hundreds of high content emails, any keyword search would turn up some of these bulk text emails.   Often they would dominate search result hiding actual useful content.

Occasionally some email sender would change their email address and would throw my filters off.  So then I would spend time adjusting my filters, to hide email,  that I would spend more time to deleting unread email.


I'm not sure what the tipping point was, but at some point I just decided to delete all of them and start over.

Yes my inbox was flooded but also reflected reality: that every email needs to be dealt with and has a cost, even if unread.



## Four sources of Email Waste

I found out that most of my email wasn't generated by human.  In other words the most important emails were getting drown out by the robots.   I found four types of email were especially problematic.

### External Newsletters, Mailing Lists, and Marketing Communication

If you are like me, you are interested in more things than you can possibly focus on.  And so, you might have dozens of various email subscriptions.  Some get read regularly but most I did not.  Some were hard to let go since they were more aspirational or tied with identity.  Unsubscribing doesn't mean the content is bad, or that you do not like the content: it's just not a priority at this time in my life.

### Social media notifications

It's unlikely you need email to be notified that something happened on your social media account. Worse is that theae email specifically design to disrupt your flow.  Turn them all off.  I'm sure you'll find another reason to check Facebook.

### Internal group emails

Turns out I was also a member of various internal groups at work.  Many were now no longer relevant to my current role.  Others, I just didn't have much to add and happy to delegate. Unsubscribe.  It's likely the messages are archived somewhere if you need them (hint: you won't).

### Automated reports and alerts

After deleting all my filters I found some reports and alert are triggered and sent every day.  I didn't really notice before since they were hidden.  But now, instead of ignoring them I'm asking questions:

* Is this report still valid and actionable?
* Is anyone actually reading it?
* Is the frequency correct?
* Is email the right medium?

If every report that comes in isn't actionable, then it's broken.

Some reports were deleted, some unsubscribed from, others were adjusted to use another medium saving everyone from having to deal with email.  And some continue to nag me until I fix the underlying 

### So what did happen next?

I actually like email now!

I'm still learning what's the best email workflow for me, but I found deleting my old filters triggers a hard evaluation of what's important or not.  The subsequent mass un-subscription has really simplified my email workflow.  It has reduced time spent in email but at the same time increased usefulness and improved turn-around time to people that matter.

I still use email filters, but never to skip the inbox.  They now help me save time instead of deferring work.  For instance:

* deleting persistent spam
* tagging thing like receipts and iternaries from some known providers.  They stay in the Inbox but after archieving they are easily found.
* marking a few people as "extra important" so I work on those ASAP

What can you unsubscribe from?
